# CLI Reference

## `lsvol [volume-oid]`
Lists the subvolumes available from the given namespace volume.

## mkvol
Short for "make volume", these commands all create a new volume in the system.
These commands assume the root is using the `BasicNS` schema, which is the default.

### `mkvol.local <name>`
Creates a new volume on the local node.
This is the most basic kind of volume in Blobcache.

#### Positional Arguments
- `<name>` the name to store the volume as in the root namespace.

#### Flag Arguments
All flags are optional and have sensible defaults.

- `--schema` the name of the schema to use for the volume.
- `--max-size` the maximum size of a blob in the volume. The cell will have a max size of half this value.
The current implementation does not support blob sizes greater than `16MB`.
- `--hash-algo` the name of the hash algorithm used by the volume to determine `CIDs`
    - `BLAKE3-256` the default
    - `BLAKE2b-256`
    - `SHA3-256`
    - `SHA2-256`

### `mkvol.remote <name> <peer-id> <volume-oid>`
Creates a remote volume on the local Node.
A remote volume is a Volume on another Node, but on the remote Node it won't be a remote volume, it would be a local volume, or some other kind of primitive volume.
It's only called a "remote" Volume on the local node.

#### Positional Arguments
- `name` the name to give the newly greated volume.
- `peer-id` the peer-id of the Node which has the target volume.
- `volume-oid` the `OID` of the volume on the remote Node.

### `mkvol.vault <name> <inner-oid>`
Vault volumes encrypt all of their contents including both the cell and all the blobs.

It is common to create a remote volume, and then immediately wrap it in a vault to provide end-to-end encryption.
Reading from the inner volume will produce garbled ciphertext.
Writing to the inner volume is not recommended as it can cause data loss or loss of referential integrity.

#### Positional Arguments
- `name` the name to give the newly created volume.
- `inner-oid` the OID of the volume (on the local node) to wrap.