# Blobcache vs. IPFS

## Volumes vs. Name + Blocks
Blobcache Volumes are similar to an IPNS name and the set of IPFS blocks that can be transitively reached from it. A significant difference is that Blobcache Volumes expose a transaction API with serializable isolation semantics. IPFS provides distributed, available-but-inconsistent, cryptographically signed cells. IPFS chooses availability, and Blobcache chooses consistency. A Blobcache Volume corresponds to a specific entity maintained and controlled by a specific Node. An IPFS name exists as a distributed entity on the network.

Most applications need some sort of consistent transactional cell (even if they don't realize it).
In order to be useful, inconsistent-but-available cells have to be used carefully in an application-specific way.
This required application-specific care is one reason for the lack of adoption of [CRDTs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conflict-free_replicated_data_type).

## Complicated Flexibility
IPFS tries to be maximally flexible; every decision point in the architecture has multiple implementations.
This contributes to significant complexity across the ecosystem.

As an example, the Multihash format is pervasive in the IPFS ecosystem.
It amounts to a tag for the algorithm used to create a hash, followed by the hash output.
This means that every single hash in a data structure could use a different algorithm, and the algorithm is determined by the data.
That approach accommodates unrealistic use cases at the cost of performance and implementation complexity.
Typically, a hash-linked data structure is built using a single hash algorithm, and the chosen algorithm is part of the security assumptions.
If the data can convince you to use a different hash algorithm, then the security is only as good as the weakest hash algorithm in the system.

Blobcache allows each Volume to choose a hash algorithm, and all of the blobs within a Volume are identified using that algorithm.
The algorithm used only needs to be stored once per Volume, and the Volume configuration carries the security assumption.
If the user doesn't trust a particular hash function, they can create a Volume that doesn't use it.

## Public vs. Private
IPFS is a public network.
The only option for privacy is to create a completely separate private network.
IPFS nodes connect to other nodes owned by other people using a DHT.
This DHT is used to track the location of blobs in a global context.
A Node can request any blob from any other Node, and the default is for the serving Node to give out the requested blob without any kind of authorization check.
IPFS is similar to Bittorrent in this way.

A Blobcache Node only dials connections to Nodes when the user asks to connect to a remote Node.
A Blobcache Node only accepts connections from other Nodes if it has been configured to.
Each Volume in Blobcache requires permission to access.
That permission can be given out to specific trusted peers by configuring the host Node's policy.
Or it can be encapsulated in a LinkToken and stored in a Volume, which gives access to everyone who can see the containing Volume.
A Blobcache Node can be used to store public and private data simultaneously.
